README.md, before:

# The NIMBLE Programming Language

![logo](doc/img/logo.png)

NIMBLE (Nam's Interpreted Modular Basic Language Engine) is a dynamically typed, interpreted programming language with C-like syntax. This repository contains the source code for the NIMBLE programming language's interpreter.

I started this project at the beginning of June 2024 with the goal of learning more about programming language design and practicing my C++ skills. It then gradually became one of my biggest projects yet. 

This was a gigantic learning project for me. The interpreter is not very optimized and there may be some bugs that I overlooked, but I'm quite happy with how it turned out. I'll definitely continute working on when I have the time.

# Syntax

```nimble
fun fib(n)
{
    if (n <= 1)
    {
        return n;
    }

    return fib(n - 2) + fib(n - 1);
}

var li = [];

for (var i = 0; i < 20; i = i + 1)
{
    li[i] = fib(i);
}

print(li);
```

NIMBLE is a dynamically typed programming language, featuring C-like syntax with class support and C++ inheritance syntax. It has a very "*fun*" syntax (because the function keyword is *fun*)

# Requirements

Before compilation, you'll need to have these tools installed first:
- [Clang](https://clang.llvm.org/) or [GCC](https://gcc.gnu.org/) (I built this with Clang but GCC works just fine)
- [GNU Make](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/)

# Project structure

| Directory | Description |
| --- | --- |
| [benchmark](benchmark/) | Benchmark programs |
| [doc](doc/) | Documentation |
| [example](example/) | Example programs |
| [include](include/) | Header files |
| [src](src/) | Source code |
| [test](test/) | Test cases |
| [tool](tool/) | Useful tools and scripts |
| [vsc-syntax](vsc-syntax/) | VScode syntax support extension |

# Compiling

If you're using `make`:
- `make compile` to compile the program into the `bin/` directory
- `make run` to run the program
- `make clean` to clean up the object and binary files
- `make test` to run test cases

If you're using `cmake`:
- `mkdir build` and `cd build` to create a `build/` directory and go into it
- `cmake ..` to generate build files
- `make` to compile
- `make clean_all` to clean up the `build/` directory

# Benchmark

Average elapsed time of computationally intensive programs:

| Program | AET |
| --- | :---: |
| bintree.nbl | 82s |
| count.nbl | 57s |
| fibonacci.nbl | 77s |
| prime.nbl | 35s | 

# Documentation

You can find the documentation in the [doc](doc/) directory. You can also learn about the syntax of the language through example programs found in the [example](example/) directory.

# References

- [Making a Programming Language & Interpreter in under 10 minutes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A3gTw1ZkeK0)
- [Writing An Interpreter In Go](https://www.amazon.com/Writing-Interpreter-Go-Thorsten-Ball/dp/3982016118)
- [Crafting Interpreters](https://craftinginterpreters.com/)
- [Make YOUR OWN Programming Language in Python](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLZQftyCk7_SdoVexSmwy_tBgs7P0b97yD&si=cr5N8m9Ybknj0Pvr)
- [Let's Write an Interpreter (in 168 Lines of Python)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LgsW0eGk-6U)
- [My First Language Frontend with LLVM Tutorial](https://www.llvm.org/docs/tutorial/MyFirstLanguageFrontend/index.html)

Commit message:

Update README.md with vscode extension link

README.md, after:

# The NIMBLE Programming Language

![logo](doc/img/logo.png)

NIMBLE (Nam's Interpreted Modular Basic Language Engine) is a dynamically typed, interpreted programming language with C-like syntax. This repository contains the source code for the NIMBLE programming language's interpreter.

I started this project at the beginning of June 2024 with the goal of learning more about programming language design and practicing my C++ skills. It then gradually became one of my biggest projects yet. 

This was a gigantic learning project for me. The interpreter is not very optimized and there may be some bugs that I overlooked, but I'm quite happy with how it turned out. I'll definitely continute working on when I have the time.

# Syntax

```nimble
fun fib(n)
{
    if (n <= 1)
    {
        return n;
    }

    return fib(n - 2) + fib(n - 1);
}

var li = [];

for (var i = 0; i < 20; i = i + 1)
{
    li[i] = fib(i);
}

print(li);
```

NIMBLE is a dynamically typed programming language, featuring C-like syntax with class support and C++ inheritance syntax. It has a very "*fun*" syntax (because the function keyword is *fun*)

# Requirements

Before compilation, you'll need to have these tools installed first:
- [Clang](https://clang.llvm.org/) or [GCC](https://gcc.gnu.org/) (I built this with Clang but GCC works just fine)
- [GNU Make](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/)

# Project structure

| Directory | Description |
| --- | --- |
| [benchmark](benchmark/) | Benchmark programs |
| [doc](doc/) | Documentation |
| [example](example/) | Example programs |
| [include](include/) | Header files |
| [src](src/) | Source code |
| [test](test/) | Test cases |
| [tool](tool/) | Useful tools and scripts |
| [vsc-syntax](vsc-syntax/) | VScode syntax support extension |

# Compiling

If you're using `make`:
- `make compile` to compile the program into the `bin/` directory
- `make run` to run the program
- `make clean` to clean up the object and binary files
- `make test` to run test cases

If you're using `cmake`:
- `mkdir build` and `cd build` to create a `build/` directory and go into it
- `cmake ..` to generate build files
- `make` to compile
- `make clean_all` to clean up the `build/` directory

# Benchmark

Average elapsed time of computationally intensive programs:

| Program | AET |
| --- | :---: |
| bintree.nbl | 82s |
| count.nbl | 57s |
| fibonacci.nbl | 77s |
| prime.nbl | 35s | 

# Documentation

You can find the documentation in the [doc](doc/) directory. You can also learn about the syntax of the language through example programs found in the [example](example/) directory.

# VSCode syntax support

I've created a VSCode extension for the language. You can checkout the extension [here](https://github.com/namberino/nimble-vscode)

# References

- [Making a Programming Language & Interpreter in under 10 minutes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A3gTw1ZkeK0)
- [Writing An Interpreter In Go](https://www.amazon.com/Writing-Interpreter-Go-Thorsten-Ball/dp/3982016118)
- [Crafting Interpreters](https://craftinginterpreters.com/)
- [Make YOUR OWN Programming Language in Python](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLZQftyCk7_SdoVexSmwy_tBgs7P0b97yD&si=cr5N8m9Ybknj0Pvr)
- [Let's Write an Interpreter (in 168 Lines of Python)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LgsW0eGk-6U)
- [My First Language Frontend with LLVM Tutorial](https://www.llvm.org/docs/tutorial/MyFirstLanguageFrontend/index.html)
